The Mediterranean region is well-known
for its beautiful olive groves
and delicious olive oil.
Some of the oldest olive trees are found
in Greece and in the Middle East.
It’s thought that some of the trees
are thousands of years old,
and yet they continue to “bear fruit,”
and they endure.
They endure
epidemic disease,
they endure drought,
they endure abuse
and even neglect,
and they “bear fruit.”
But there’s one thing that is required
for an olive tree to produce fruit
—water.
In years of drought,
olive trees don’t produce fruit.
So, what do we learn from the olive tree,
and how does that relate to today’s text?
Turn with me, please, to Luke chapter 8,
and let’s read verse 15 in its entirety.
Here, Jesus concludes his discussion
of the man who sowed seed
that fell on different types of soil.
“As for that on the fine soil,
“these are the ones who,
“after hearing the word
with a fine and good heart,
[number one] retain it.”
They ‘retain the word,’
and, number two, they “bear fruit
with endurance.”
Now, we’re glad Luke included that detail
that neither Mark nor Matthew
included in their accounts.
Bearing fruit as faithful disciples of Christ
would require endurance.
And what is the key to endurance?
Well, the answer is in the verse.
Do you see it?
By ‘retaining the word,’
we “bear fruit with endurance.”
So, like the olive tree,
you and I want to be fruitful.
Like the olive tree,
you and I will experience hardships,
challenges, disappointments,
and discouragement at times.
And how is it
that we “bear fruit with endurance”?
By having a heart attachment
to Jehovah’s Word.
We need to read it every day
and meditate on it
—digest it spiritually.
Why?
Because the hope that we share with others
is the same hope that sustains us
and strengthens our determination
to continue faithful
in the work Jehovah has given us to do.
The Watchtower
from which today’s text is drawn,
discussed one challenge
—unresponsive territory.
And certainly, that can be a challenge.
I couldn’t help but think
of Brother Georg Lindal.
Brother Lindal
lived in Canada when he learned the truth,
and shortly after his baptism,
he began to pioneer.
And Brother Lindal had a skill.
He could speak Icelandic.
So he decided to move to Iceland.
He did that in 1929 at the age of 40.
Now, little did he know
how much endurance would be required
to stick to his assignment.
For 18 years
he was the only Witness in Iceland.
And during those years,
not one person to whom he preached
took a stand for the truth.
Now, in 1936,
after he had been there for seven years,
he commented that he had placed
tens of thousands of books,
and yet not one person responded.
He said,
‘Some have taken a stand against the truth,
but the majority continue to be indifferent.’
Would such an assignment
call for endurance?
Absolutely!
And Brother Lindal
did endure faithfully in that assignment.
Now, there are other challenges
that can make bearing witness difficult.
For example,
we have brothers and sisters in the world
who are facing persecution
and restrictions on the work.
And in some places, the work is banned,
and yet they continue
to “bear fruit with endurance.”
I thought of Brother Harold King
who, along with his
missionary partner Stanley Jones,
served in China during the 1950’s
and early 1960’s.
In 1958, Brother King was sentenced
to five years of solitary confinement.
Now, that would be,
it seems, a recipe
for a long period of loneliness
and possible discouragement.
But how did Brother King address it?
How did he approach it?
And what sustained him?
Well, it was the reservoir
that he had built up of Bible knowledge.
And just like his partner, Brother Jones,
Brother King remembered
as many Bible verses as he could.
And he drew on that reservoir
to sustain himself spiritually
during his years of imprisonment.
We might think of the brother
featured in the Sunday morning symposium
on our regional convention program
who was able to write down 500 Bible verses.
How many could we write
if we found ourselves in that situation?
It emphasizes the importance
of building up a reservoir.
The Watchtower  asked
this interesting question:
‘If the two brothers, King and Jones,
‘had failed to make a serious and diligent
study of the Bible
‘before their arrest,
what would have sustained them spiritually?’
Well, it’s a good reminder for us.
Now, the verses that Brother King recalled
also helped him to “bear fruit,” in a way.
In solitary confinement,
he still went out in the ministry
in the mornings,
talking to imaginary people.
Eventually, he met Mrs. Carter
who, after a series of return visits,
agreed to a Bible study.
Now, in the course of his ministry,
Brother King says that he spoke out loud.
Why?
So that he could hear with his ears
the hope that he was sharing
with his imaginary audience,
and Jehovah’s Word sustained him.
So we ‘retain the word,’
and we “bear fruit with endurance.”
There’s one other thing that we are enduring
—a pandemic.
And would you agree
that it calls for endurance
in ways that we haven’t experienced before?
For example, in our ministry,
we’ve been forced to consider
avenues of witnessing
that we might not have been
attracted to before.
A circuit overseer’s wife shared
some interesting comments in that connection.
She said: “We’re having
some of the best experiences
“through telephone witnessing.
“I have to say, it was
somewhat intimidating when we started.
“But it is so obvious
how Jehovah is blessing this work.
“In the congregations,
Bible studies have almost doubled,
“and we have more return visits
than we can handle.
It is so wonderful.”
Well, it is wonderful
because Jehovah is blessing the work,
and he is enabling us
to keep bearing fruit with endurance.
In his letter, James said
that we should ‘consider it all joy,
‘when we meet with various trials,
‘knowing as we do
that the tested quality of our faith
works out endurance.’
But James continues:
‘Allow endurance to complete its work.’
Why?
‘So that you and I will be
complete and sound in all respects,
not lacking in anything.’
That is our determination, isn’t it?
We would never seek to escape a trial
by some unscriptural means.
No, we’re determined to “retain” God’s Word
and to “bear fruit.”
As one of our Kingdom songs so well states:
“We will not give up
nor see the need for doubt or fear.
“Faithfully we’ll serve
until Jehovah’s day is here.
“Let’s keep on enduring.
That time is very near.”
Yes, you and I are determined
to be amongst those
who will “retain” God’s Word
and “bear fruit with endurance.”